---
title: "Epsiode 1: 认知科学"
category: note
layout: podcast
release-schedule: 2019/12/30
anchorfm:
publish: false
---

这一期节目我们首先从讨论什么是认知科学开始。与我们一起讨论的嘉宾是约翰霍普金斯大学认知科学系博士Donald Li。

### 文献

- **CORE:** Núñez, R., Allen, M., Gao, R., Rigoli, C. M., Relaford-Doyle, J., & Semenuks, A. (2019). What happened to cognitive science?. Nature human behaviour, 3(8), 782-791. ([Journal Page](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41562-019-0626-2?fbclid=IwAR1aQKLHz73e-buHf0KEoS_L0YaYnwiD-giIZZFcCjWF8v2G7VEXhQrDtuI))
- **Supporting:** Frith, U. (2019). Fast Lane to Slow Science. Trends in cognitive sciences. ([Journal Page](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1364661319302426))
- **Supporting:** Syllabus, *Foundation of Cognitive Science*, Johns Hopkins University, 2018 ([PDF](/assets/docs/01/jhu_foundation_of_cogsci_2018.pdf))
- **Supporting:** Syllabus, *Introduction to Cognitive Psychology*, Johns Hopkins University, 2014 ([PDF](/assets/docs/01/jhu_intro_cogpsy_2014.pdf))

### 延伸

认知科学中的一些重要问题：

- Theory- vs. Data-Centering
  - Should the primary goal of congnitive science be to construct a comprehensive, insightful theory or to collect and describe a comprehensive set of data?
- Theories of brain function vs. theories of behavior vs. theories of mental knowledge
  - what is cognitive science the science of? [mental knowledge]
- Levels of cognitive analysis
  - At what level does the explanation of cognitive phenomena lie: the level of individual neurons, or a more fine-grained, coarse-grained, or abstract level?
- Explanation vs. description
  - What should be the descriptive or explanatory goals of cognitive science?
- Internal vs. external/functional explanation
  - should cognitive explanation derive from principles internal to the cognitive system, or from external factors such as the function served by cognition or the physical constraints under which it operates?
- Formal vs. non-formal theories
  - what is the appropriate level of formality for cognitive theory? is human knowledge a formal system?
- Computational vs. non-computational frameworks
  - Should a cognitive theory be a computational theory, viewing the mind as a machine that takes data in, processes it according to an algorithm, and output behavior?
- Representational vs. non-representational frameworks
  - Does cognition deploy representations of the outside world, on which it computs?
- Competence vs. performance
  - Should cognitive science seek theories that explain the details of actual human performance, or theories of 'competence' -- the knowledge underlying performance, ignoring the vagaries of particular instances of use of this knowledge?
- Models vs. theories
  - Should cognitive science strive to build models or theories of cognition, and how are these two related?
- Mind as statistical processor vs. mind as structure processor
  - Is the mind primarily a device for processing highly structured, symbolic information, or primarily a device for performing statistical analysis of experiences?
- Nativism vs. empiricism
  - Does knowledge derive from experiences? [not the crucial knowledge]
- Abduction vs. data-driven induction
  - Is abstract knowledge generalized from experience (data-driven induction) or does experience select among a priori abstract hypothses in the form of data-generating models (abduction)? [abduction]
- Conscious vs unconscious processes
  - What roles do conscious and unconscious processes play in an overall theory of cognition?
- Explicit vs. implicit knowledge/rule-follwing vs. rule-governed
  - Is knowledge (e.g. a rule) explicitly encoded in the mind as a declarative statement S for a general-purpose interpreter, or implicitly encoded in a system whose behavior can be described by S? [implicit]
- Knowledge/concepts as rules/definitions vs. examples
  - In the mind, are concepts, or knowledge more generally, constituted of stored specific examples, or of general definitions or rules, as in mathematics?
- Inference and decision making: logic based vs. non-rational approaches
  - Are human inferences and decisions based on some kind of logic
- Serial vs. parallel processing
  - what roles do serial and parallel processes play in an overall theory of cognition [abstract seriality]
- Independent mental faculties ('modules') vs. interactionism
  - Is the mind a collection of fairly autonomous faculties or modules, each concerned with some particular cognitive domain and governed by its own idiosyncractic principles, or is the mental processing of information from multiple domains so heavily interactive that decomposition into separate modules is not possible or useful?
- Localized vs. distributed neural realization
  - Are localized bits of representations, knowledge, or processes realized in localized bits of the nervous system
- Situated vs. non-situated cognition
  - must a theory of cognition depend crucially on the way the mind is situated in the body and in the external social and physical world?
